# Hedgerows in the Sky
___NOTE:__ This series is currently under draft. Large portions may be missing,
incomplete, or subject to change._

- [Latest Draft](https://github.com/jgaehring/hedgerows/blob/draft/index.md)
- [Bibliography](notes/README.md)
- [All Notes](notes/README.md)

## Abstract
Today in 2023, the food sovereignty and data sovereignty movements are united in
the call for more cooperative production methods and a commitment to common-pool
resources. There is an increasing degree of interchange and direct collaboration
between their communities, and clear parallels can be drawn between their
respective practices. One can compare collectivized farm management to
cooperative data trusts; free fridges and other mutual aid food programs to the
communal administration of decentralized social media networks; sliding scale
food coops or CSA solidarity shares to software projects sponsored through
Liberapay, OpenCollective, donate buttons or some combination of crowdfunding
mechanisms.

Turn back the clock by ten or twenty years, however, and those correspondences
were not as conspicuous. While notions of collective autonomy can be insinuated
from the local food and free-culture movements of that era, and indeed many
practitioners were already formulating those concepts within their respective
disciplines, neither food sovereignty nor data sovereignty had yet gained much
popular recognition. Accordingly, there was very little dialogue between the two
movements, with few opportunities for their divergent fields to collaborate,
share resources or swap notes. The small farming and local food movements of
that era fixated on what was near-at-hand, low-tech, organic, provincial and
professedly slow. Meanwhile, the free-culture and open source movements set
their gaze on global streams of non-rivalrous information, liberated by their
abstractness and cutting-edge technology to travel across all borders,
effortlessly and instantaneously.

This article will examine the convergent evolution of these two movements by
surveying the relevant technological milestones and sociopolitical developments
of the intervening years. For a more subjective view, I offer the story of my
own encounters with each of these movements, while also situating them within
the longer history of agriculture, information technology and the Commons.
Finally, I'll reflect on the latest initiatives that have emerged through their
union and what synergies remain to be explored.

## Series Outline
This series was originally intended to comprise a single essay, but the subject
matter proved far too expansive for a continuous piece and too impractical to
condense. The separate parts are listed below with their status and a link to
the most current material available for each.

|          | Status  | Subtitle                                                |
| -------: | :------ | :------------------------------------------------------ |
| [Part 1] | Draft   | __Concerning knowledge enclosures and how they may be truly leveled__ |
| [Part 2] | Outline | __A tale of two movements__                             |
| [Part 3] | Outline | __Towards the unified commons of food, land, and technology__ |

[Part 1]: https://github.com/jgaehring/hedgerows/blob/draft/index.md
[Part 2]:
    https://github.com/jgaehring/hedgerows/blob/draft/notes/outline-of-narrative.md#part-2-a-tale-of-two-movements
[Part 3]:
    https://github.com/jgaehring/hedgerows/blob/draft/notes/outline-of-narrative.md#part-3-towards-the-unified-commons-of-food-land-and-technology
